by now you've seen all of the main
pieces of the recommender system
algorithm or the collaborative filtering
algorithm in this video I want to just
share one loss implementational detail
namely mean normalization which can
sometimes just make the algorithm work a
little bit better to motivate the idea
of mean normalization let's consider an
example of where there's a user that has
not written any movies so in addition to
our four users Alice Bob Carol and Dave
have added a fifth user Eve who has
invaded any movies let's see what our
collaborative filtering algorithm will
do on this user let's say that n is
equal to two and so we're going to learn
two features and we're going to have to
learn a parameter vector theta five
which is going to be in R to remember
this now vectors in the heart and not
our n plus one when we learn the
parameter vector theta five for our user
number five Eve so if we look in the
first term in this optimization
objective well the user Eve hasn't
raised in any movies and so you know
there are no movies there are no movies
for which R IJ is equal to one for the
user Eve and so this first term plays no
role at all in determining theta 5
because there are no movies that Eve is
rated and so the only term that affects
theta 5 is this term and so we're saying
that we want to choose vector theta 5 so
that the last regularization term is as
long as possible
in other words we want to minimize this
lambda over 2 theta 5 subscript 1
squared plus
theta 5 subscript 2 squared so that's
the component of the regularization term
that corresponds to use a 5 and of
course if your goal is to minimize this
term then what you're going to end up
with is just theta 5 equals 0 0 because
the regularization term is encouraging
us to set parameters close to 0 and if
there is no data to try to pull the
parameters away from 0 because this
first term is it doesn't affect theta 5
groups end up with theta 5 equals the
vector of all zeros and so when we go to
predict how user 5 of a tiny movie we
have that theta 5 transpose x I for any
I that's just going to be equal to 0 and
so because theta 5 is 0 for any value of
x this inner product is going to equal 0
and what we're going to have therefore
is that when I predict that Eve is going
to rate every single movie with zero
stars but this doesn't seem very useful
does it I mean if you look at the
different movies you know love that laws
this first movie a couple people rated
it five stars and four you know the even
those dear Souls vs. karate is someone
rated it 5 stars so some people do like
some movies it seems kind of not useful
to just predict that Eve was going to
bring everything zero stars and in fact
if we're predicting that Eve is going to
rate everything zero stars we also don't
have any good way of recommending any
movies to her because you know all of
these movies are getting exactly the
same predicted rating for Eve so there's
no one movie with a higher predicted
rating that we could recommend to her so
that's not very good
the idea of me normalization will let us
fix this problem so here's how it works
as before let me group all of my movie
ratings into this matrix wise we'll just
take all of these ratings and group them
into this matrix Y and just call them
over here of all question marks
corresponds to Eve
not having read any movies now to
perform mean normalization what I'm
going to do is compute the average
rating that each Ruby obtains and I'm
going to store that in a vector that we
call you
so the first movie got two five star and
two zero star ratings so the average of
that is a two point five star rating you
know second movie and an average of two
point five star send so on then the
final movie has zero zero five zero and
the average of zero zero five zero that
averages out to an average of one point
two five rating and then what I'm going
to do is look at all the movie ratings
and I'm going to subtract off the mean
rating so this first element five I'm
going to subtract off of two point five
Omega zero two point five and the second
element five subtract off it 2.5 unit
2.5 and then B is zero zero subtract off
two point five then we get minus two
point five minus two point five in other
words what I'm going to do is take my
matrix that movie ratings they take this
Y matrix and subtract from each row the
average rating for that movie so what
I'm doing is I'm just normalizing each
movie to have an average rating of zero
and so just one last example if you look
at this last row these zero zero five
zero we're going to subtract one point
two five and so I end up with these
values over here okay so now and of
course the question marks there question
mark and so each movie in this new
matrix Y has an average rating of zero
what I'm going to do then is take this
set of ratings and use it with my
collaborative filtering algorithm so I'm
going to pretend that this was the data
that I had gotten through my users will
pretend that these were the actual
ratings I had gotten from the users and
I'm going to use this as my data set
with wish to learn my parameters theta J
and my features X I from these mean
normalized review
when I want to make predictions of movie
ratings what I'm going to do is the
following
for a user J on movie I I'm gonna
predict theta J transpose X i where X
and theta are the parameters have
learned from this me normalize data set
but because on the data set I had
subtracted off the means in order to
make prediction on movie I I'm going to
need to add back in the mean and so I'm
going to add back in mu I and so that's
going to be our prediction where my
training data are subtracted up all the
means and so when I make predictions I
need to add back in these means we rifle
movie I and so specifically for a user
of five which is Eve the same argument
as the previous slide store applies in
the sense that Eve had not rated any
movies and so the learn parameter for
user five is still going to be equal to
zero zero and and so what we're going to
get then is that on a particular movie I
we're going to predict for Eve theta v
transpose X I plus add back in mu I and
so this first component is going to
equal zero if theta v is equal to zero
and so a movie I we're gonna end up
predicting mu I and this this actually
make sense and use it on Ruby one we're
going to protect Eve rates in 2.5 on
movie to we're going to predict Eve
racer 2.5 on movie three we're putting
greater than 2 and so on and this
actually makes sense because it says
that if Eve hasn't written any movies we
just don't know anything about this new
user Eve what we're going to do is just
predict for each of the movies whatever
the average rating that those movie got
finally as an aside in this video we
talked about mean normalization where we
normalized
each row of the matrix Y to be mean 0 in
case you have some movies with no
ratings so there's analogous to a user
who hasn't written anything but in case
you have some movies with no ratings you
can also play with their versions of the
algorithm where you are normalized to
different columns to have mean 0 instead
of normalizing the rows that means 0
although that's maybe less important
because if you really have a movie with
no ratings maybe you just shouldn't
recommend that movie to anyone anyway
and so no taking taking care of the kids
of a user who hasn't written anything
might be more important than taking care
of the case of a movie that hasn't
gotten a single rating
so to summarize that's how you can do
mean normalization as a solid
pre-processing step for collaborative
filtering depending on your data set
this might sometimes make your
implementation work just a little bit
better